For this assignment you will need to answer two questions:

How strong is the support for a causal relation in this study? You will be asked to support your answer by providing at least two potential alternative explanations for the results. For each of these alternative explanations, indicate which threat to internal validity is involved.

Answer: The research seeks to prove that the self-deceit-false beliefs of individuals about their skills – is widespread in humans. So, people consistently overestimate their abilities, have positive illusions and deny its shortcomings.  This happens because we are extremely prone to overconfidence-reflecting both inflated beliefs about our abilities, as low self-esteem stemming from a negative self-image. These biased beliefs can lead to costly errors, with disastrous consequences, including plane crashes, financial collapses and war.

The survey was applied in two universities and sought to prove the self-deceit through obtaining the partial correlation between self-deception and deception as well as susceptibility to being deceived self-cheating and controlling for current grades/ranks. In addition, there was a repetition of the analysis through the control of the variables age, sex, family income, size of group and tutorial College. It is worth noting that the non-parametric Statistics were used to analyse the global correlation between auto and other forecasts and actual performance.  It's up to point out that the gender variable is not manageable, considering that virtually all participants were of the female gender which prevents the self-deceit occur similarly in male individuals.

The research proved through significant positive correlation between autodecepção and deception measures based on absolute and relative ranks individuals regardless of gender, age, family income, size of group or tutorial University when auto evaluate positively are evaluated positively by others even if they are not able to run everything they say they can do in reality. In addition, the prolonged interaction between the subject of investigation, could reduce or eliminate the ability of a self deluded fool another participant of the research, because the disappointment only work while the individual wrong had little knowledge on the misleading in order to prove this hypothesis there was a repetition of the final exercise of a tutorial about six weeks after the first experience.

This last experience proved that the measures of self-cheating and disappointment remained significantly correlated, however there was little effect of the interaction of this temporal scale. Furthermore, it was noted that in one of the universities, the levels of self-deceit changed significantly on Friday week compared to last week suggesting that the levels of change of self-deceit change according to the degree of interaction of Getz. The repetition of the survey proved that it prolonged contact between evaluator and evaluated could lessen the ability of self deluded fool another participant of the research can be considered valid once the search reapplied after six weeks of the first exhibition found this fact by means of the correlation coefficient. However, the period of six weeks can be considered too short for the re-application of the survey, as it is not possible to say that the participants have not been in touch.


How would you investigate the authors' hypothesis if you could design a study from scratch? You can choose any of the designs discussed in module 3. You will be asked to indicate what design and what variables you would use, and in general terms how you would operationalize your variable. Indicate how your choices would resolve some of the methodological issues you raised in the previous question.

Answer: In this way would it be possible for a deeper understanding about the relationships between the observed variables, such as gender, age, family income, size of group or tutorial College, that although during the search have not been found against these variables with self-deceit or low self-esteem at the time of research and your reapplication;  could demonstrate long term (1 year) some kind of correlation, especially if the search reapplied in male individuals in the same proportion of female gender.
