A-) Factorial designs: consists of two or more independent variables and - for now - one dependent variable. The independent variables are crossed, to ensure that all cells are represented in the study and that each cell contains enough participants.

I-) They allow us to investigate not only the main effects of several factors, but also the combined effects, or interaction effects.

II-) The effects of the factors separately are called main effects.

III-) When the number of factors increases the design becomes very complicated very quickly. 

OBSERVATION: There are even more complicated factorial designs, called incomplete designs where not all combinations of levels of the factors, or cells, are actually present in the design.


B-) Repeated measures: is used as a synonym for a within subjects design, but is also used to refer to more complex designs with at least one within factor and possibly one or more between factors.

I-) The concept of a within factor is closely related to the terms repeated measure design and longitudinal design. Both terms refer, obviously, to studies where the dependent variable is measured repeatedly. For example: In a within subjects design, the same participants are measured on the dependent variable after being exposed to each level of the independent variable. Otherwise we wouldn't know what the effect of each level or condition is.

II-) The term 'longitudinal design' refers to studies that measure the same variables repeatedly, over a long period of time. We're talking months, even years or decades. The term 'longitudinal design' usually refers to correlational studies where no independent variables are manipulated. But the term does include experimental or quasi-experimental studies that succeed in long-term manipulation of independent variables; such studies are rare though.

RESUME:
i-) Longitudinal: study repeatedly measures variables over a long period.

ii-)Repeated measure designs: measure repeatedly, but run shorter and refer to studies with manipulated independent variables where there is at least one within factor and possibly one or more between factors. 

iii-) The term within-subjects design is generally used to indicate a design consisting of within factors only. 


C-) Manipulation:  refers to control over the independent variable. For example: in a true experiment the value or level of the independent variable that a participant experiences, is determined - or manipulated - by the researcher.

I-) Helps to control external variables by keeping variables of disinterest constant you can rule out any alternative explanations they might have otherwise provided.

II-) The term 'levels' nicely indicates that the independent variable is present in different ways or to different degrees in these three settings.

III-) Terms are 'conditions' and 'groups'. If the independent variable is absent this level is called the control condition or control group. 

IV-) Experimental variable: independent variable fully controlled by the researcher. 

V-) Individual difference variables:  variables that cannot be manipulated because they are an intrinsic property of the participant. For example: Properties like age or gender, for example, are not under the researchers control. 

VI -) However, some variables that seem like non-manipulable, individual difference
variables can be manipulated. 

VII-) It is important to realize that manipulation can fail. 

VIII-) You can check whether the intended level of the independent variable was actually experienced, by measuring it. This is referred to as a manipulation check. It is important to perform this check, this measurement after measuring the dependent, effect variable. Otherwise you might give away the purpose of the experiment.

IX-) Variables that are held constant are called control variables. 

OBSERVATION: “Ceteris Paribus” principle. It means “all other things equal”. If you find an effect - a difference between
conditions on the dependent variable - then you can assume this effect is caused by the independent variable.

RESUME: Manipulation is about creating different levels or conditions that represent different values of the independent variable. Effectiveness of a manipulation can be assessed using a manipulation check. Control means keeping external variables the same across conditions. For individual differences variables manipulation or experimental control is not possible. 


D-) Lab vs. field: manipulation of the independent variable and control of extraneous variables, keeping them all the same across conditions.

I-)  Large amount of control.

II-) Control over the setting and circumstances under which the research is conducted. 

III-) The experimental method combined with the control that a lab setting offers, maximizes internal validity.

IV-) High internal validity, but some argue that it has low ecological validity or mundane realism, refers to how closely the
lab setting approximates how people would naturally experience a phenomenon.

V-) Experimental realism: find a experimental translation of the phenomenon as it occurs naturally.

OBSERVATION:The experimental translation might be very different from what happens in ‘real life’, but that doesn’t mean that within the lab setting, the construct isn’t adequately manipulated or measured and that the lab results won’t generalize to other, more ‘natural’ instances of the investigated relationship.

#Maximizing internal validity and the maximizing external validity#


E-) Randomization: provides a way of eliminating all possible systematic differences between conditions all at once. 

I-) No systematic difference between the groups other than on the independent variable. 

II-) The problem is that the groups are not of equal size, which is a nuisance statistically speaking

III-) You can apply it to several characteristics combined, sex and age for example, but with more than two or three variables to stratify on, things become complicated.

IV-) Counterbalancing: the order in which within-subjects designs are exposed to the conditions should be randomized. Subjects are assigned to one out of all possible orderings of the conditions, possibly using blocking to ensure that no one ordering is overrepresented.

OBSERVATION:
i-) You can measure relevant background or control variables and simply check to see whether randomization worked and the conditions are the same, or whether randomization failed and the conditions differ on these variables.

ii-) There is a way to guarantee randomization works on a select set of variables, by using restricted randomization procedures. 

iii-) blocking is the simplest form of restricted randomization once It ensures equal or almost equal group sizes also equal representation of a specific subject characteristic, for example equal numbers of boys and girls in each group.

Subjects are assigned to one out of all possible orderings of the conditions, possibly using blocking to ensure that no one ordering is overrepresented.


F-) Experimental designs: maximize internal validity with: manipulation of the independent variable, comparison between conditions exposed to different levels of the independent variable and of course random assignment to these conditions.

APPLICATION: The simplest design is the two-group design. Participants are randomly assigned to one of two conditions, usually an
experimental condition where the hypothesized cause is present and a control condition where it's absent. The independent variable could also differ between the conditions in amount or kind,

OBSERVATION:
I-) In the two-group design the dependent variable is measured after exposure to the independent variable to assess the difference between conditions, which are likely to be similar in all respects due to the random Assignment, including their pre-existing position on the dependent variable.

II-) Of course in small groups, randomization doesn't always work. In such cases it might be wise to use a two-group pretest/posttest design, which adds a pretest of the dependent variable before exposure to the independent variable. 

III-) With a pretest you can check whether for example both groups of boys were equally proficient at math before being exposed to a female versus a male math teacher for a month. This is an possible threat to internal validity.

IV-) A pretest also allows the researcher to compare the size of the increase or decrease in scores in the experimental and control condition.

V-) Unfortunately a pretest can sometimes sensitize participants. The pretest may result in a practice effect, leading to higher scores on the posttest or it may alert participants to the purpose of the study. Especially if this effect is stronger for one of the conditions internal validity will be negatively affected. But there is a way to take such unwanted effects of a pretest into account by using a Solomon four-group design. 

VI-)  Solomon four-group design: way to take such unwanted effects of a pretest into account by using a gn. This is a
combination of the two-group design and the two-group pretest/posttest design. The experimental and control condition are run twice, once with a pretest and once without.

VII-) With the results of the pretest groups we could come up with a better, more difficult test, showing differences between the two pretest groups and two non-pretest groups in a follow-up study.

VIII-) The only thing that is really different to the previous, between-subjects designs is that the random assignment of participants is not to the conditions themselves, because they experience all of them, but to the order in which the conditions are experienced.


G-) Matching: When random assignment is impossible, one way to mitigate the selection threat to internal validity is to match participants on relevant background variables. 

APPLICATION: 

I-) Find matching groups on these variables and discard participants that do not match up. 

II-) Start with groups of equal ability because the relation between the matching variable and dependent variable has to be very strong, because they measure the same propert

III-) Use a pretest of cognitive ability to select comparable disadvantaged and advantaged toddlers. The pretest - is related to the independent variable, advantaged versus disadvantaged background. It is likely that 'in real life' children who lack stimulation and security - whether through nature or nurture - already have lower cognitive abilities.

OBSERVATION: 

i-) A potential danger in the use of matching though! A thing called undermatching could occur. This can happen when the conditions are matched on a variable that is measured with some degree of error and is related to the variables of interest. To understand what this means and how undermatching can occur you first need to understand what regression to the mean is.

ii-) Matching is only a problem if the variable that we match on is related to our variables of interest. 

iii-) If these groups differ in cognitive ability and we select a sample of toddlers from the disadvantaged and the advantaged group so that they have about the same cognitive ability that means you choose disadvantages toddlers with relatively high scores, relative to the mean score of their group and advantaged children with relatively low scores, relative to the mean score of their group.

iv-) So without any intervention you would already expect a difference between these groups on the post-test, based on just the regression to the mean effect. 

v-) This distorting effect of regression to the mean due to matching, showing a detrimental effect instead of the hypothesized beneficial effect is called undermatching. Now this effect can only occur if the matching variable is related to the variables of interest and is measured with a fair amount of error - which is unfortunately the case for most social and psychological variables. This of course does not apply to variables like age, sex and educational level, which can be assessed without, well almost without, measurement error.

H-) Quasi-experimental designs: look and feel like experimental designs but they always lack the key feature of random assignment. They can lack the feature of manipulation and comparison as well. Like a true experiment, a quasi-experiment is generally used to demonstrate a causal relationship. 

APPLICATION: 

I-) Cases where the researcher can manipulate the independent variable but is unable to assign people randomly due to practical or ethical reasons.

II-) Cases where the independent variable is an individual differences variable and can’t be manipulatedO or it's a variable that happens 'naturally' to some people and notothers, like a traumatic war experience. Some people refer to studies that employ these
types of independent variables as ‘natural experiments’.

III-) When the independent variable can be manipulated or 'selected', conditions can be compared. The simplest design at our disposal in that case is the static group comparison design. This design is similar to the two-group experimental design with just a posttest after exposure to the independent variable.

IV-) The only difference is non-random assignment, which means the selection threat to internal validity is always present. The comparison of groups lessens the threats of maturation and history. But it is very well possible that a pre-existing difference between conditions on the dependent variable exists. 

V-) If you can determine whether there were any pre-existing differences on the dependent variable. If you can show that such differences don’t exist, you've firmly disambiguated the causal order. you can also assess the size of any maturation effects.

OBSERVATION: 

i-) Unfortunately it’s not always possible to use a control group. In that case the only thing you can do is at least establish temporal precedence of the cause by using a one-grouppretest/posttest design. All the other threats to internal validity still apply though.

ii-) Interrupted time-series design:  improve on the one group pretest/posttest design including more measurements of the dependent variable before and after exposure to the independent variable. 

iii-) More observations before and after the ‘treatment’ allow you to assess any natural change in the dependent variable. If the change is gradual with a sudden jump from just before to just after the ‘treatment’, we can rule out - at least to some extent - the threats of maturation and history.

iv-) One way to check whether there truly is an effect and not a history effect is to use a replicated interrupted time-series design. This design adds a second group of participants for whom the dependent variable is measured at the same time points, but no ‘treatment‘ is administered. This is basically a more complicated version of the pretest/posttest nonequivalent control group design. Consider this outcome: if we see the same pattern for the second group there’s probably a history threat present. The design could also be implemented by exposing a second group to the same ‘treatment’ but at a different time than the first group. Consider this outcome: if the effect also shows if the intervention is presented just a little bit later, we can be more sure what was actually cause. 

I-) Correlational design: refers either to studies that do not employ any form of manipulation of the independent variable, or to studies that don’t even identify an independent variable, because the hypothesis doesn’t specify a causal relationship. So in correlational studies you don’t manipulate or select, you just measure. If an independent variable is identified, any causal inference needs to be made with extreme caution, because temporal precedence of the cause is really hard to establish, never mind all the other threats to internal validity, especially selection. Just like with experimental and quasi-experimental designs, there are a couple of standard correlational designs that you should be familiar with. 

I-) The cross-sectional design in which a cross-section of a population, one - usually large – group, is considered at one specific point in time. Usually a fairly large number of properties are measured at once.The aim is to investigate the association between variables in a way that accurately describes a larger population. Within the large sample, groups may be compared but it's important to note that participants were not selected beforehand to represent a level of an independent variable like in quasi-experimental studies with individual differences variables.

II-) The term survey study or survey design is sometimes used to denote a cross-sectional design, since these studies often make use of surveys. But this is an unfortunate term, because the method of measurement really has nothing to do with the research setup.

III-) A time-series design can refer to one person being measured at several points in time, usually with many measurement moments in quick succession and in fixed intervals. In some social science fields the term time-series design is used interchangeably with the term longitudinal design. But 'longitudinal design' generally refers to a group being measured at several points in time, so this can lead to confusion.  The term time-series is also used for quasi-experimental designs where one or more conditions are measured repeatedly before and after an intervention or placebo is administered.

IV-) The term panel design or time-series cross-sectional design, is used for nonexperimental studies that follow more than one individual over a longer period of time, without an intervention or placebo. In panel designs the same group of people is measured at several points in time. A special case of a panel design is a cohort design, where the participants are all the same age, or started a new school or job at the same time.

V-) Longitudinal design refers to any study that follows one or more participants over a long period of time, whether it's experimental, quasiexperimental or correlational.

VI-) Time-series design usually refers to correlational studies of just one person measured at fixed intervals. The term time-series can also refer to groups of individuals being measured repeatedly, but then the term is associated with quasi-experimental designs. The term time-series design is sometimes also used for experimental studies, although the term N=1 study is more popular in this context. The term repeated measures implies an experimental study where at least one independent variable was manipulated or selected.

RESUME:  In correlational designs researchers distinguish three types of studies that differ on the dimensions of individuals and time. Cross-sectional designs concern the measurement of many individuals - usually on many variables - at one point in time. Time-series-designs follow only  one individual over several points in time. Panel studies combine both dimensions, by considering a group of the same individuals at several points in time.

